But the final thing I wanna talk about for
today really is that post
launch optimization phase.
Is the, go live phase, the live phase.
And is the bit that gets,
it's like the ugly stepchild
that everybody tries to ignore.
It's like people don't seem to think about
what happens when something goes live.
And to be honest, I think that comes
from our culture as organizations and
the way that we are structured and
we work in projects, right?
And a project has a beginning,
a middle and an end.
And everything about the people
that are assigned to a project,
the budget that's assigned to the project,
the timelines that a project has,
they're all finite, right?
But digital services,
digital channels, digital apps,
whatever you wanna call, are not finite.
Well, they're not gonna be
there until the sun burns out.
But they don't end when
the project to development ends,
they develop well after that.
And so thinking about what happens when
this thing first launches is really,
really important,
both in terms of its resourcing,
in terms of its funding and
the rest of it.
But also in terms of its design because
no design is perfect on launch,
no matter how much you've
tested it beforehand, right?
Nothing beats real users
carrying out naturally into
interactions on your website,
on your app, whatever,
to realize what could be
improved about the design.
You need to see real people using it
in the real world to understand what's
working.
And so really that's why post
launch optimization from a design
perspective is the single most
important phase of the project and
yet it's the one that's
neglected the most, right?
I've been designing for 27 years,
you think now I'd get it right every time.
If you did nothing else for
20, 27 years repeatedly,
you think you get pretty good at it.
I mean, we were hearing earlier about
Mark and his VR games that you put
300 hours into, which I personally
I just think is obscene.
But by that he was getting perfect score
every time but it doesn't work like that
with design, is variable,
it's changeable, is always different.
And so you never get it perfect
until you've launched it.
And it can make such
an enormous difference.
And there's such a big
business case here for
doing that kinda post launch optimization.
And what it basically comes
down to is very, very simple.
We watch what users do and
we learn from that, right?
And it can make an enormous difference.
My all time, one of my favorite articles
is an article by Jared Spool, right?
Jared Spools is an amazing user
experience guy who works with some
incredible organizations.
And he worked on one project
where they identified a problem
on the site with the login and
registration process.
They realized that people were dropping
out, they decided to do some testing and
improvement and iterations,
A/B testing and that kind of thing.
And through one change, they increase
the company's revenue by 300 million.
That is the power of A/B testing, that is
the power of post launch optimization.
Now that you might not work
on sites [LAUGH] that can
make one change and
make 300 million extra.
But even a more modest projects
like the kind that I work on,
I work with one company for
five years, an e-commerce company,
just to stand in the e-commerce company.
Nothing particularly special about it,
they sell frozen ready
meals to old people.
It's not exactly sexy, I don't get to
work on sexy things like Jared does.
But over a five year period
of optimizing their site and
improving over time, we increased
their conversion rate a hundred fold,
not their conversion rate,
their revenue, a hundred fold.
Now that's huge,
that's an enormous return investment.
Did we redesign the website from
top to bottom in that time?
Not really, no,
we incrementally improved it.
Sometimes those incremental
improvements were bigger than others.
But that's the power of post launch
optimization where you can see real users
interacting with your
website in real time.
So how do we do this kind of work,
for a start,
how do we get the client agreed
to this kind of work, right?
And that's all about preparing the ground
for this kind of optimization.
Before you get to it,
before you get to the live stage,
you've gotta get this into your
stakeholders and clients heads.
So start early,
from the very start of the project
talk about post launch optimization.
Add at least some time to your
timeline for that kind of work.
So as a rule of thumb these days,
we're not,
cuz inevitably they want a gantt chart or
time line for
your project,
which are always works of fiction, right?
Nobody's ever stuck to one of
those things, I don't believe,
at least not in my experience.
But the temptation is the last thing
on that timeline, is go live, right?
New, new, new, never do that.
Have that about two-thirds of
the way through the timeline, right?
So you've got a good chunk of time for
development bug fixing for a start.
Once the website goes live or an app goes
live, you find bugs, it's just inevitable.
But also to at least start the process
of optimizing the website post launch,
simple thing you can do,
makes a ton of difference to
build that in from the beginning.
The other thing is to
create that ideas list,
remember earlier I was talking
about how to deal with scope creep.
And that you just start a list to have
post launch features and improvements.
And the list then encourages, everybody
starts adding stuff to it, they get ideas,
people then start getting excited about
what you could do once you go live and
you build a bit of buzz and
enthusiasm around it.
So that starts to introduce some stuff.
[CROSSTALK]
>> A bit of a comment,
I feel like with a product
versus a website with a product,
oftentimes launch is
really just the start.
>> Yeah,
>> It's that whole release early,
release often.
And, for instance, with Frontend Masters,
we should have done this much earlier but
we just hired.
It was about at the beginning of the year,
we hired a user research, user testing.
And have a company to kinda go through and
audit the product and
give suggestions and
then come up with A/B testing.
And so we're starting to run some of
that to try to improve the product,
improve the website.
>> It's surprising mine, I mean, you
say what people that have products tend
to think more in this way and
you're absolutely right, they do, right?
But I'm still surprised especially
with an enterprise companies,
traditional, large,
retail businesses or places like that.
There often there isn't that mindset
still that they often launch,
a product is launched out of associated
with some marketing campaign,
something that's not
core to their offering.
They often are left to wither and die.
Yeah, I've seen companies start community
sites that are left to wither and die.
Or they they decide that they're gonna
launch a mobile app cuz everybody has apps
these days and needs to be in the app
store and then nothing's done with it.
So, yeah, I think there is
a better mindset with that.
But I think it tends to be in
more progressive companies and
that older companies tend to be a little
bit stuck in that project mindset of,
do a project, move on.
Especially if it's driven
by marketing cuz marketing
are very orientated about campaigns, you
do a campaign you move on to the next one.
So it's breaking that thinking that I
think we all need to be doing really